# 2.0 Cells and Systems Notes

Date Created: 2023/03/23

Class: Science

Part of: Unit B (Cells and Systems)

Location: grade8/science/cells_and_systems/2.0notes.md

## 2.1 | The Microscope Extends the Sense of Sight

### Introducing the Compound Light Microscope
A microscope makes the image of a small object larger. This can make it so you have a clear and defined image that the human eye can see. 

### Microscope parts and their Functions
Any Microscope that has 2 or more lenses is a *compound microscope*.

When you view the image through the microscope, you are looking through **a thin slice of the object**. The light must travel through the thin object for you to see properly

## 2.2 The Cell Is the Basic Unit of Life

**Cells** are the smallest known functioning units of life. All organisms must be made up of at least one cell, and in most organisms, they rarely work alone. Cells with a similar structure are organized into **tissues**. Tissues that work together for a common purpose form **organs**, and an **organ system** is a group of organs that work together to keep you alive.

| Structure | Function|
|-----------|---------|
|nucleus | a “command centre” that directs all cellular activities such as movement, growth, and other life functions
| mitochondria | the “powerhouses” of the cell where chemical reactions occur that convert the energy the cell receives into a form it can use|
|vacuoles|the “storage rooms” where nutrients, water, or other substances can be stored by the cell. Plant cells tend to have just one big vacuole, and animal cells have many small vacuoles|
|cytoplasm|the “kitchen” of the cell. It contains the nutrients required by the cell to maintain its life processes.|
|cell wall|the “frame” of the cell. Found in plant cells but not in animal cells, it provides strength and support to plants.|
|chloroplasts|the “solar panels” of the cell. They are found in the cells of the green parts of plants. They carry out photosynthesis, converting the sun’s energy into food for the cell| 

## 2.3 | Organisms Can Be Single-Celled or Multicelled

Cells are usually individual living units. However, there are some cells that are **multicellular**. This means they are made up of 2 or more cells. Plants and animals are examples of multicellular organisms.

Other organisms are **unicellular**. They are made up of only a single cell.

Most microscopic organisms, or **micro-organisms**, such as mycoplasma, are examples of unicellular organisms.

Multicellular organisms rely on many very specialized cells to perfoem functions such as feeding, moving and so on. As as result, all the cells within multicelled organisms react interact with each other.

## 2.4 | How Substances Move Into and Out of Cells

The cells in your body is moving to support it. This is not unique to humans. The process is called **diffusion**, and that happens when many substances move through the cell membrane.

### The Cell Membrane and Diffusion

Diffusion is the movement of particles
from an area where there are more of
them to an area where there are fewer
of them.

It's basically an "evening out" process


